hi everybody and welcome back I'm super
thrilled to introduce my close friends
and co-conspirators in many ways Don XYZ
and Sammy vieler Don is a new media and
internet artist producing web-based
interactive work and digital media tools
since 2008. as a founder of new art City
he claims he aims to provide an
accessible toolkit to all types of
artists and create a connected online
home for born digital artifacts his
personal artwork aims to discover and
amplify Aesthetics intrinsic to data
formats either in user interfaces and
the World Wide Web he lives and works in
Oakland California and we're also going
to hear from Sami wheeler and Sami
wheeler is a multimedia artist and
gallery director of new art City based
in Los Angeles and I will also say that
Don played a super sick algor Rave DJ
set last night that I was really sad to
miss
um and so I have to shout out his uh
very multi-faceted skill set
um we're gonna have a little short talk
from them and the three of us will come
back and we'll do a tour through the
exhibition that we make together and
here uh here they are
foreign
again
it's hard there's like so many zones
okay
um well hello I'm Don XYZ
um with new art city and with me is
Sammy vieler We're co-founders of new
art City
and um we're here to talk to you today
about what what we do why we do it
um who we're building for how you can
get involved
um
and all that
yeah I mean why don't you talk about
yourself a little bit just like what
what was your background before you
started with New York City and like what
led you into it okay well I'm
I'm primarily an internet artist I I
make websites and digital media art that
usually ends up as some form of online
content
and when I
like coming up to the creation of New
York City I was doing my MFA degree over
at San Jose State University working
with the question of like how do you
show digital artwork in the best
possible setting
um
and how do you uplift internet art to
the exhibition standards of Fine Art and
these questions came head on with the
like immediate need once the pandemic
hit of
showing Art online because all of the
art exhibitions moved online everybody
had to find a solution so the the
questions that I was grappling with
became Ultra relevant and the first
thing that I did was just make a demo a
prototype where you could just upload
whatever media files you've got and it
renders them in 3D and that proved to be
like pretty useful
um so we used it at San Jose State for
the undergraduate show and kind of
got got attention from there from from
local organizations we worked with
kodame and gray area was one of the
first supporters with their creative
code showcase
and kind of have been building from
there and yeah that's around the time
that that Sammy joined at New York City
as well
[Music]
yeah
um and that was sort of the point where
Don had an inbox that was too full to
keep up with and also sort of
manage building the product and so
my background was originally in sort of
traditional technology where I worked in
all these different areas just trying to
sort of figure out how I might fit in
like in the attack world and I was sort
of
Consulting with other people who had
like MVP stage startups which I think is
just sort of a hilarious term when you
think about what we're doing at new art
City because it's so
it's so
it's so human here where it's like so
Community oriented so I really I really
I feel like I just picked up right where
Don left off where he could sense that
building a community around the tool was
necessary and I had all of these sort of
skills and interests to do it so we
started by making a Discord and it's
over 300 artists Educators and curators
from all around the world many of whom
who have met there who are you know
neighbors a couple of miles away or
neighbors across their country or
neighbors you know around the world
and sort of helping cultivate
Partnerships and sort of helping support
artists individually has been sort of my
core focus in new art City
yeah just to speak a little bit about
what Nord city is if you've never
checked it out it's a website so you can
go to our homepage newart.city and
you'll see like 70 plus shows that have
been launched over the past year and a
half
and there's no downloads or anything you
just jump into the show and then you can
navigate it in 3D and see other people
who are there with you as well
in this 3D Gallery experience really
wouldn't be possible without 3js which
is this amazing software library that
lets you render 3D Graphics in the
browser and a lot of what we built is
really just customizing the examples
that their Community has provided
so it's really about making a user
interface for three graphics on the web
which is kind of complex
and we're trying to make that accessible
and approachable for artists who may not
have a coding background so you can
upload kind of whatever media files that
you've got whether that's a 3D file
audio a video an image and arrange them
using our drag and drop editor so it's
like this content management system
layer that lets you manage your 3D
Assets in space
and it takes this task of building a 3D
website which would have taken weeks or
even months down to something that can
take days or even hours
[Music]
and indeed that's sort of exactly what
happened with me when I started using
new art City I was in the middle of
formalizing a sound art portfolio based
out of sort of five years of work that I
had been doing in private and was ready
to sort of start calling art
and I sort of hit a wall where I was
thinking like okay I don't really want
to release songs how else can I make
like sound installations like geez I'm
gonna have to get an MFA
um and so as soon as I found I found out
that Don was making this tool I got a
room and I immediately started placing
sounds around the space and it was just
brilliant to be able to Crossfade
between the different sounds and so
I mean insofar as anybody with a
computer has all these images and and
video on their computer just like random
screenshots and the Internet is just
like an endless Trove of these things it
was quite easy for me to just start
painting
really quickly in this space to sort of
create architectures that felt like they
they matched the sounds that I was
making and it really just opened up my
own work in this spectacular way so I
felt kind of
[Music]
um
yeah I feel compelled to sort of help
share this with other people because I
feel like it's it's a really powerful
tool for artists who already have some
tooling experience but it's even more
exciting I think to open a space for
people who might not see themselves as
artists in the same way to express
themselves with the images and other
multimedia that sort of surround them at
all times
so we've been in kind of a you know an
endless beta for the last 18 months
we've been in private beta which means
that anybody who wants to show on new
art city has to submit a proposal which
can be as short as four sentences and we
tried to make it really accessible in
that way but the reason why we want to
do this is because we wanted to talk to
every single person who is showing in
the gallery the same way you would if
you were like leasing out space in a an
endless you know Art Factory
um and so this meant that we could
select and see like okay these are these
are people who are who have
institutional power and clout that can
be redistributed and these are people
whose work might have been marginalized
in other spaces
who we like really want to support and
so we've been really focusing on
developing those connections by hand and
like working with institutions that
really want to support
our mission
um and sort of we really aim to open a
space where
the hierarchies of the past are no
longer present
so a big part of why we're doing this is
to create a space that's really a Level
Playing Field for artists
um so much so many technology platforms
amplify the problems created by like
systematic Injustice and we really want
to address that by
making sure that the people that we show
and uplift
are those who didn't have as many
opportunities to share their voice and
their vision and their artwork before
um so that's the kind of curation goals
you'll see in the gallery and the
artwork that we produce and put up and
fund with our commissions
yeah so I think
Don touched on like what platforms do
and that's why we like we differentiate
ourselves and sort of insist that we're
a toolkit and not a platform
because like and sort of this is this is
a ground up decision to avoid turning
users into products and so if you
compare us to a platform we move quite
slowly but if you compare us to a museum
and we do have over 30 000 artworks in
our
you know collection all owned by the
individual artists themselves then we
move absurdly fast on our home page
alone there are about 65 public shows
but that is sort of like an iceberg
there are many more that aren't actually
published on the home page that were
produced sort of with or without our
help
but it enables a tremendous velocity and
it starts to approach I think the
velocity with which images actually move
in the world or at least gives curators
a fighting chance to sort of respond
thoughtfully in a reasonable amount of
time
you know they were there were multiple
shows that Engage The Conversation of
nfts like while that was happening on
new art City because you can move so
quickly
um
but yeah truly at the end of the day
we're hoping to take this sort of Nexus
of power and privilege and continue to
redirect it to people who are
disadvantaged by structural Injustice
so in our first year and a half of
working on Newark city we've been
growing at a very deliberately slow pace
because we want to make sure we do it
right bring in the people who are going
to build a good community and make sure
it really works for them make sure we're
actually solving real problems for
artists and creating a tool that is
helpful
um and we're getting to a point now
where things are
are pretty solid people are making
really great shows pretty much all the
time like almost every week There's a
new show coming out and we want to kind
of widen this
this doorway for for artists to come in
individual artists
um so we're going to be launching our
first public beta
um that allows individual artists to
sign up and support support Newark city
financially but also support the mission
and be one of the first people to to
join yeah and it's like you when you
join the community it's still like it's
not like a platform where we're we're
like rapidly trying to attract users
we're adding 100 licenses at a time in
the beta and we have 300 people in our
Discord because like we're sort of aware
of the effects of flooding communities
because like we have like an actual
culture of mutual Aid that we want to
continue to grow and cultivate and sort
of rapid growth is kind of anathema to
that kind of practice and so it's really
not an understatement to say that if you
join new art city in this beta then
you'll have that you'll have a real sort
of
impact on the path forward
really want to thank great area for
being like a dedicated supporter they've
done a lot of their creative code
showcases their immersive
shows and this is the second gray area
Festival exhibition that we're doing
with them so it's really cool to have
um a local partner who's so supportive
of our mission and we're really excited
for you all to see the exhibition that's
premiering with the festival today
thank you thanks
and we're back with Don and Sammy feeler
thank you guys so much for being here
um what a great I mean first of all you
know no things be needed for being your
partner I love new art city and it's
just so amazing and we're back
with the delay kind of playing behind me
so sorry about that but um the um
you know it's so amazing to see this
platform develop and provide such an
amazing toolkit for artists you know I
first came in contact with the pro
project John when you were first
starting out on it
um and I was working on I was starting
my own virtual Gallery silicon valet
um and I want I wanted to create online
exhibitions I you know didn't have a ton
of technical know-how
um and I just needed some support in the
toolkit to do that and we you know I
created a show called dismal sessions
um with uh most dismal swamp uh in in in
new art city and that was one of the
best experiences ever it was just so
amazing to get to work with a group of
people for the first time and create
something online together that was so
interactive so engaging we're a place
where and it created a place where
people could meet and that was so so
meaningful for me
um
and it's so interesting to you know to
know that you really dedicatedly do not
describe as a platform you describe as a
toolkit
um and you know the one thing that and
this is not just to play Devil's
Advocate and to kind of test the waters
a little bit you know
I think a lot about governance of of
platforms and particularly as we move
into crypto we were talking to Kia
coiler this morning about governance
models for blockchain operations
um and I'm wondering you know as a
toolkit you know how like of course you
don't want the tool to be put into the
wrong hands or employed in a way that's
damaging or harmful
um and you know normally when you think
of a platform I know this is like very
contested by the United States Supreme
Court but um you know the platform is
meant to also have some sort of
responsibility or some duty to the
content that's prepared there and kind
of the results of what happens with the
technology they've created and I'm
wondering how do you how did the two of
you balance that access and openness
with also
um you know and and control that you
need to have in order to keep the the
members of the marginalized communities
who are using the platform safe
so glad that you asked that question
um yeah it gets it like a really good
Nuance where I mean one thing I was
observing today even is like there's a
way in which platforms try to solve sort
of Social and societal Problems by hard
coding rules and I think there's
something really it's kind of like the
way that games can be built in new Arts
it is that rules aren't hard-coded what
happens is in the mind and so like the
community aspect of what new art city is
why we insist on calling it a platform
right because it's the technology is
only one small part of what makes it
magic and it truly is Magic
um like and sort of the way that the
community was founded in the beginning I
think this is a great way to talk about
output field is like it was really small
it was like it was our team and it was
me and we started bringing in some
people who are using it um and then we
we brought in people like Viv who runs
output field and they view themselves as
a placeless coalition and I met them
through their research just talking to
artists and facilitating one-on-ones
just to understand sort of asking broad
questions about like what's frustrating
and like what's frustrating about
publishing work simply because it was
proving to be an end in itself
um and so what we did was like establish
norms and sort of hypotheses for how a
community could function before you know
people got to the party and so we had
all of this time to and like interactive
ability to to create like an actual
Community Spirit which is like if you
think of the Endless September on BBS
servers way back when right the the idea
was that servers would have this culture
and Norms that that developed because
there were a lot of people interacting
with one another and as you get floods
of undergraduates who have no experience
with it the Norms like they can't they
can't generate roots and so like what
we're trying to do is focus on the human
element
um and it's it's like the it's like we
haven't had a single issue I don't think
with like problematic behavior in our
Discord and it's like it's like
skowanadi was talking about where it's
like you're worried about like who's on
the other side of the screen it's like
wait I already know like Don already
knows all these people it's like there's
always Six Degrees of Separation it's
just amazing
yeah and I mean just to you know you
know can take carry on on that I mean
the community ethos that gray area is a
gray area the New York City is rooted in
um is so rich I mean your Discord is
such a wonderful Community where like
I've gone and I've asked questions when
I couldn't figure something out and
people have helped me or I've shared you
know I've shared ideas with other people
and I've you know I've been an active
Community member on the Discord for a
long time and
um I all you I've never witnessed
anything that even comes close to
something that might be considered
questionable there's not even anything
that needs to be trigger warning
um you know you know it's just a really
lovely space and so you know you know
I'm wondering you know how you cultivate
that sense of community and how you
nourish it not only through the tools
that you make available but also through
the space outside of the the toolkit
that you know you you uh bring people
into
yeah I mean I think it's really about
just growing slowly and deliberately and
leading by example
um we want we want people in the
community to feel empowered to help each
other out and we try to make all of the
information available make it sure make
sure everybody can get the answers to
the questions that they have either
directly from us and by us answering
questions that come up kind of like as
quickly as possible other people learn
and
they're they feel empowered to also
answer questions like everybody helps
each other out because that's just what
we what we try to do in in the space of
the community
and I think that extends to the way
opportunity travels in New York City as
well I mean so like an amazing example
of this type of like chemical reaction
it's like another really cool thing that
we that like we do with output field as
our relationship evolves is we have we
dedicate 20 of our Revenue to
commissions and so they are doing the
work of curating marginalized artists in
a way that's like really really
respectful and so it's a pleasure and
they're really doing us a favor by help
letting us divert resources to these
projects that we care about because
curation takes a lot of energy and like
we're focusing on building a tool and a
community at the same time so bringing
in people who have been so instrumental
in the community building and diverting
resources to them is kind of a
no-brainer and so the chemical reactions
that happen are people like Wade see
shows like Jesus and they say holy [__]
she must show in in gray area right and
that happened because we want wanted to
have a residency program where we we
brought in an artist and basically gave
them the same type of service that we
gave you to build this where it's like
what's your dream how can we make this
happen and so hisu wanted to build a
digital Shrine and we thought holy [__]
that's like the coolest thing ever let's
give her some money so she can do it
that's amazing and I mean yeah it's so
true like I you know I go I go to like
basically every show at North City
because I just love to see what
everybody's up to and
um the that I I remember I I know he so
I know her offline we've been friends
for a couple years and
um I you know I I didn't even know that
she was doing this and the link came up
and I was like oh my God and I ran there
immediately and like what she was doing
was so connected to this idea of
worlding protocol and creating space and
connecting to ancestral family
traditional
um ancient trajectories you know it was
so prom is so clear in the work and that
something that happened organically from
you guys creating space to build those
worlds to to do the to do the work that
we're kind of theorizing and talking
about and conceptualizing here at Walton
protocol
um and so as part of that Vision you
work so closely with the community I
mean obviously we've been talking about
that but also through or through uh
really distinct collaborations with
different uh community members different
curatorial groups so I was wondering if
you could talk a little a little bit
about how that works
um and some of the kinds of synergies
that you've got uh not to use a
corporate word but that you've got kind
of going on with other actors in the
space
yeah so much of this is a is about
um
community building and letting people
come in
um so giving a clear path for people to
get in touch and send us their ideas
which is just a proposal form on our
home page you can anybody can hit that
link and tell us what they want to do
and we send out space to almost
everybody who asks because we want to we
want to bring in the people who want to
make good art and like reach a global
audience with it
um and
the new media art community is very
small like the the fine art community in
the art community in general is is small
and New Media art is just a little
sliver of that so like Sammy said a
minute ago like
we kind of have like a few degrees of
separation from most of the people
um
and
yeah it's really great to just kind of
like connect people and
get these get the people in who
um
who will will make the connections
deeper for everybody involved
um and we learned so much from our
collaborations with individual artists
like hisu and and institutions like
format Festival who sort of force us to
think out of what outside of what we've
done before and sort of solve problems
for these things that haven't had that
much like history and virtual space like
installing a virtual biennale is
something that we're and like our shows
of that magnitude virtually is is like a
really specific type of Challenge and
we've had the blessing to work with a
lot of different people who had like
um really interesting ideas about sort
of how to do it and so each time we
collaborate with somebody we get more
questions that we get to answer it's
like we get yeah Don gets more problems
to solve
yeah and each collaboration is really
really a learning experience because
people will come up with
I mean kind of we kind of like
understand the needs of a an online
exhibition but each time that we scale
up the needs become more complex and
more nuanced um like with these these
huge exhibitions and like the gray area
Festival like we're building all of this
infrastructure to support these larger
exhibitions because we really started
with just the single room model it's
like okay you're an artist you can have
a room have a space upload your pieces
and that's that and then it grew into
okay we need more than one room we need
some artists will do a group show or
some artists we'll just have so much
work that they need to connect all these
rooms together and we've built that into
a project structure where a project
contains multiple rooms and we're also
like that's that's also not enough
because we're working with bigger
organizations like universities and how
how does a university manage all of
their projects well they have a like an
organization organizational account
where they can administer all of their
projects and all of the students who are
in all of the rooms so it's really about
like
these like increments of like taxonomies
like rooms projects organizations and
like getting all of this um
working but also like still focusing on
the core level like solve problems for
artists and yeah
and I think what's interesting too is
that you know even though you're using
the word solve here like what you're
creating doesn't feel like solutionism
it feels like something that's a
constantly evolving
um you know adaptable like framework or
structure that helps to undergird
something and it's not so much a problem
but it's like hey you know we need to
build sideways what kind of you know
support beam do we need to do that let's
make it happen
um you know and that's something that
makes it the whole platform in the
community surrounding it as well as the
unbelievable outputs I mean I've spent
hours and hours and hours just going
through different shows watching
different pieces I mean it's it's just
so so rich
um
and I think you know
how do I ask this question
um I gotta think about this for a second
um
where do you know what I'm going to say
this instead you know what do you see
the trajectory of new art City to be at
this phase
um and we've got a couple for instance
we've got a couple questions in the
audience um one coming from digital
Coleman asking you know what is the
income stream
um and what do these what do your costs
look like and what's a sustainability
look like for the platform you know I'd
love to learn a little bit more about
your trajectory and also you know what
folks can do to support you guys in in
this initiative because it's
um you know I've drank I've drunk the
Kool-Aid basically everyone and I think
that you know I want to get as many
books on board as as possible and many
people have and that enthusiasm is just
like so such a delight to us like I mean
the way that we've made money so far is
like meeting people who have
institutional power who hear what our
mission is and say hell yeah we want to
support that with money and so we are
able to make these things for them and
they we're basically they're basically
paying for our time because it's like
you know it'll take us up to you know 80
100 hours to put together an exhibition
um and so we get knowledge we get clout
and we also and we also get money in
return for that and that's like it's
it's like it's kept as afloat and a
couple of like people like format
Festival where like huge lifelines
people people like gray area huge
lifelines
um but yeah I mean I think I mean we
have a lot of other ways that we're that
we're like working I think Don can speak
to those yeah we're about a year and a
half in since the start of the project
and honestly we're still laying
groundwork like this is not the final
not the final form because we're making
something that we want it to be as easy
as possible for artists to use anybody
anybody even if you don't have technical
experience right now it's really helpful
if you do have some technical tooling
experience in these digital media
artifacts to upload but we want it to be
even easier and more accessible to
anybody and making these processes like
optimization for web like significantly
easier or built it right into the
toolkit where you wouldn't even have to
think about what like format your file
is or if it's too big or what you just
uploaded it and it changes it into a web
friendly format like making these
Pathways like extremely accessible is a
huge part of our goal and
also a huge part of our goals that we're
like looking at solutions for is how to
get artists paid
um because like
as we know the digital media art
historically has been very hard to
monetize because it's infinite
replicability all of that I mean things
have changed in the past year with with
that
um but we're looking at all sorts of
ways of like making these sustainable
economies work for artists
um and like I just said we're in the in
the groundwork and infrastructure phase
of that but as artists come on to the
the toolkit
they will be they will in the future be
seeing ways for them to earn money and
like support themselves as artists using
the tools that we create
absolutely it's like it's a Nexus of
power and creativity where like the it's
it's this like
tight-knit collection of people who have
these skills and like a new field that
we call like virtual curation that
encompasses not only sort of bringing
works and conversation with one another
and developing relationships with
artists but understanding the the
various affordances of virtual space in
a way that can help artists like
transmit their work in a site
um
and it's there there are many people in
our Network who are getting really good
at this and we're hoping we can sort of
extend them outward
um I think pragmatically also we're
working on a public beta which means
that people can sign up and and pay a
monthly subscription fee which is
partially to get access to the tool yes
but it's also like I think there are
many there are many people in our
community who feel a sense of like
responsibility to like and they like
want to help support us and so it's an
opportunity finally for people who have
that Affinity to do so
I mean that's a really this is really
exciting to hear about this new model
um because you know it's it's
I think you know I think because so many
people like myself included you know are
probably chomping at the bit to try to
support you in in different ways um and
I imagine this is going to unlock all
different kinds of experiences and ways
for people to be involved in shaping how
the platform develops
um but I mean not to you know not to
drill in too much but just you know you
know the sustainability aside and
technically you know kind of where do
you want new art City to go and what do
you in you know in five ten years from
now what would you want it to represent
to the artist community and what would
you know what's your vision for what the
platform will will look like
today
uh it's like you can we can dream and we
have some ideas but like I'm really
really committed to like being here for
artists in the way that we can In This
Moment it's like
um yeah because there are lots of people
who say one day we'll make lots of money
and we'll give it to you we're like [__]
that we have money we gotta give it back
um and so like yeah like I I really want
it to be more social I want I want to be
able to gather there in ways that like
are really hard to do in the these
spaces that are owned by platforms it's
just like it building community on
Instagram is [__] impossible
um and like I I really I really want a
place that is that where like your data
isn't a product where you can actually
just breathe and where your
communication belongs to you
yeah I like to put it kind of briefly
just say that
we want to create an online home for
digital art like the world has never
seen before
we want to create a place where digital
artists feel welcome and at home
and have a
a place for their work that stands up to
the exhibition standards of the Fine Art
world and the future of Art
yeah and this extends to like archiving
and preservation and portfolio but also
things that have been lost in the
digital age like correspondence like the
one of my dreams is like to be able to
actually just keep my like letters and
and like communication with these
wonderful contemporaries that I share in
a way that's preservable
um I had another thought but I think I
lost it
that's okay
um you know it the uh
you know another thing that I want to
ask you about because this is something
that I've been kind of whispering about
with you know other New Media artists
and curators you know the one roadblock
that I potentially see is just the
the kaleidoscopic array of protocols and
file formats that you know the the 3D
design space is currently like inundated
by I mean you know there's a million
different file file types and on the
first hand and they all kind of do
different things there's different
protocols that for instance through JS
versus a different kind of webgl might
might use in order to display an object
in 3D on the web
um and you know intercompatibility is
something that I've been really you know
thinking a lot about particularly having
just built a show in Newark city
receiving files in one in one version
having to totally remake them in order
to for them to to work on a you know in
something that loads and not like three
hours
um or you know turns off Wi-Fi for your
entire block
and so you know I'm wondering how you
you know in thinking in in in in
thinking in looking towards the future
you know how do you approach these
issues
yeah these file format problems are
things that
us as exhibition designers like all the
people who are building in north city or
even building for the web is a
consideration like you've got to get
your files into a web friendly format
but honestly this is a problem that
computers can solve like this is
something that can be automated like
knowing which type of file format to
convert it to is like you shouldn't have
to know that like the idea is like
upload whatever you want and like
whatever like manual processes you'd
have to do to get it into the right
format like that will be handled in the
future by just the the tools on our
server so I I think
it's like there's something about
publish on the web that maybe
it's an interesting Nuance right because
you can build really like Unity is a
fantastic example of this it's it's like
you can build really and you can build a
whole video game on your home computer
now which is like it's kind of like the
same Quantum Leap that the Amiga created
in the 80s
um it's just like spectacular but
getting that getting those pieces out to
people who might not have that as nice a
machine as you it's very very difficult
archiving and preserving something like
that very very difficult and then when
you think about something like blender
where like I I cut my teeth making stuff
specifically to publish on the web and
then I started investigating ways that
you could use blender to do all sorts of
other things that weren't actually
possible to publish on the web and then
I I arrived at this problem that so many
artists have where like I have a piece
that's really really cool but I can't
put it right on the web but this is
essentially the same problem you face in
physical space right I can't show my
virtual flag in in physical gray area I
would have to make a render and put it
on a screen or figure out some other
like wonky way to like make it cool in
physical space but you're you're
transforming an artifact to a site and
each time you show an artwork it's
always site-specific of course
um and so I think the the human element
of figuring out a publish for the web
has really distinct benefits which is
that it's archivable and preservable and
it also it provides a maximum maximal
amount of access that's completely
impossible with physical space because
we say like access accessibility is
intersectional where it's like yes there
are physical impairments but and there's
also the sort of quality of your machine
or your geography or like your your like
technical ability right all of these
things really matter and so we offer one
flavor of virtual exhibition that really
tries to maximize those things and we we
have Dawn is amazing at building tools
that make it easier and easier to do the
things that we were having trouble with
or that are difficult now yes and I
think what we're also building is this
beautiful like Bank of knowledge where
all of these people have different
approaches to to making an exhibition
and that makes us stronger in different
ways
hmm it's an interesting yeah totally
um and you know it's also you know I'm
also from believer of like you you know
maybe you know by building something
that works by making something that is
useful to people that makes them happy
that allows them to open up different
Pathways you know you attract folks and
you know again like Don was saying
earlier you lead by example and
um you know I would be I would be
shocked if to if more people you know
once you've seen your art City you kind
of feel like you have to make a show
there and you know I you know this this
is
the diorama show you know was one where
it was a ton of artists who'd never
encountered the platform before that we
showed for the first time and they're
all like wow oh my gosh like maybe I
want to do something you know uh Oreo
Harvey and Rhoda Warner in the show they
co-collaborated and built the Space
together you know both of them having
just tried it for the first time they
were so inspired by its ability
capability for
um you know co-authorship of of the
space that you know they ended up
creating something totally different
than what we had originally planned on
and that's you know a beautiful kind of
synthesis that that just happened
organically
um
you know I think that
um I
what did I want to ask next I think that
you know if you have any advice for
other kinds of platforms trying to offer
tools for artists like what do you want
to see more from the industry what do
you want to see more from different
companies and different platforms and
even from different curators who are
building in this space and kind of what
would you what would you want to say to
them
she's doing great honey I mean we're
just so we're just like so delighted to
be in a community because like we like I
said we're only one flavor of virtual
exhibition and we we enable you to make
a lot of different types of things but
like I don't know meeting Peter Wu is so
wonderful right because like we're both
so inspired by things like mist and
we're like really interested in World
building and he approaches it in this
way that's much more sequential and the
way that he gets to pay attention to
curation is just like it's it's just
it's so inspiring right so I think like
there are so many ways to approach I
mean solo show is another great example
there's so many ways to approach showing
work online and we don't want to be the
only one just like yeah I think it's
it's just so great that there are all
these different different ways to think
about it
hmm totally and I think that
it's yeah it is exciting to see what's
going on I mean I've been really excited
by stuff happening in Mozilla hubs I've
been really excited by you know things
that are happening even in places like
decentral under crypto voxels or
Minecraft or you know any of the other
kind of multi-user environments or game
environments that
um are available right now
um you know I don't think I I
I I don't think I have any any too many
more questions for you guys I think I
want to go like show people the show
yeah um at this point I think that's a
better way to to try to see it full of
people thanks so much Raiden thanks so
much for all of your your um work on
this exhibition I know you of all the
people put in so much time into this
coordinating all of the artists getting
all of the artworks and all of the
speakers just want to say like huge
congrats to you and thanks so much
energy yeah and yeah incredible
generosity I'm really good at doing
admin but you know who is really
instrumental in doing this were Nikki
selkin and Victoria pumader
it has been decimating models for weeks
Victor has been listening to every crazy
request I'm like hmm I want an ice floor
but an ice floor that looks like this
you know and making that happen and
realizing kind of the vision and so it
came literally really beautifully and I
we couldn't have done it without Nikki
and Victoria thank you guys so much
um and joy who created our uh who
created our exhibition graphic and our
our identity for this show and he's been
helping me in framing the text and you
know getting the word out about about
about this
um so couldn't have done it without
without everybody
um and so with that I'm gonna pull up
I'm gonna pull up the show let's dive in
let's let's go there
um come with us yeah everybody can come
with us please if you're in the audience
um please go to
newart.city slash show slash diorama I
just dropped it into the chat
um and you can find us in there we'll be
represented by little green
um by little green triangles um there's
a chat in there you can feel free to
chat directly in there I'm not going to
be looking at this game chat because I'm
going to be in the show
um so yeah come come through with us as
we as we dive in so to start us off I
wanted to just you know say a little say
a couple words
um before we go in I wanted to say a
couple words about the curation of this
show and kind of where it was coming
from and what we were aiming to do
you know
um
this show really aimed to replicate the
diorama exhibiting technique that's been
employed by museums and college for
centuries
um this installation particularly was
trying to offer a new kind of
phenomenology that critiques and expand
upon the material Force the other
simulated exhibition format which is
something that I think also really
aligns with what new art city has been
doing too I mean Sammy and the spaces
that you build in the show you
constantly are being self-referential
and trying to break the platform itself
as you're building it
um and so I think that this this
thinking through different kinds of
exhibiting formats the limitations the
possibilities is a really rich way of
start
um and just building off of that you
know the diorama itself has been a
really damaging
um it has been both a extremely damaging
and an eye-opening
um exhibiting technology
you know since it was it because it
became
hundreds of years ago you know we see
patriarchal racist colonialist
um
Stories being concretized in dioramas
all the time or part
hello
put that a little bit too and the kind
of
and the critique you know that that we
might have over these spaces so that's
really what this is all about and all of
the artists in the show
um and now I'm going to share my screen
and you know properly jump in you know
all of the artist in the show were
really thinking through a lot of these
topics
they're World building they're creating
universes they're making things happen
and they're building it on their own and
we wanted but while we can exhibit many
of the things that you know worlds a
world we can't actually create a whole
world
the original
the world the world
presentation is that serves as a portal
into the world itself so as you move
through
identical artwork um and they have
portals linked into them so you can
through the portal and go into any of
the worlds that we have uh helped to
install we've I feel like we haven't
built the world we've facilitated other
other folks worlds
um
and not filtering in artifacts from the
other worlds right because we're we're
talking about how like the it's we're
acknowledging the fact that this is this
is like a window into something bigger
than itself
um and so the same principle I mean it's
it's kind of a common thing that we do
with with the lobby spaces is try to
bring a representative artifact from
each show to go with its portal and then
try to sort of establish a site that can
bring them into conversation one another
with one another
I'm sorry I I was just told I'm getting
a little bit of lag so I'm pausing for a
second to close some programs um and
hopefully get a slightly better
connection so that it the show is coming
through a little bit more clearly for
everybody just one moment
um but yeah absolutely
um and something else that I think is
really important is that even though we
can't create the world maybe we can
still give these Works context that
feels native that feels you know like
the natural habitat of where this work
is born because I think that you know a
lot of the critique of online
exhibitions over the past particularly
since the pandemic started was that
they're limiting that they reduce you
know something that's meant to be
multi-dimensional to something that's
flat flat screen that don't use the
affordances of digital material in ways
that you know avails that you know uh
good representation of this work
so that's something that you know we
wanted to explore in this show as well
um and to unpack
um and figure out if we can do something
in a slightly you know in a better way
in a way that kind of leads into that
um and so I'm going to start off and I'm
going to go here first because we were
just talking to her so I think it's
going to be fresh in everybody's mind
we're gonna hop into a slice of Skyworld
by skawanati
um and here we have the celestial tree
uh the tree that she was discussing it's
the tree that that lights the world and
again this comes from for Machinima
piece uh she falls for ages which we've
just heard the mythology of previously
um and as you can see here we've also
got the canisters that she was talking
about where the blossoms are that light
the world are being being generated
um and this is a really nice space to
just come and chill out and and you know
just take a moment just take a breath
Sammy I want you knew I know you
collaborated quite closely with Scotty
to make this kind of set from her
Machinima film possible uh can you tell
me a little bit about like the the
collaboration processes you were helping
her to to install this oh such a delay
um I uh Victoria helped take the model
that was created in Second Life and get
all of the flowers onto the trees and
then
I it passed off to me and I figured out
how to make get all of the colors right
for the flowers and it was one of the
fun things
that I get to do is sometimes we don't
have a 3D model the canister was like
relatively easy just to create and
blender and so I saw a picture of it and
then I just copied it and then I had
seen these benches in a different
picture of her work and I thought they
were so cool and I loved the way that
the light
um hit the or like came off of the
little little pylons and so I just
popped those in there to see what's
coming out you thought but I mean it's
just so lovely to be able to just like
sit with an artist and say like okay
because like I had a different floor so
we just could go back and forth and just
like cut some shapes um and move some
things around
um and yeah so it was it was really nice
to be able to just sort of quickly
try to try to like with as much
reference as possible take what was in
scoti's mind and and translate it here
yeah absolutely and it's it it's it's
it's wonderful just to be here with the
tree because that's also something that
you know is really special about going
to AB Tech and going to that world is
you can go and you can sit by the tree
and you can you know be there in in its
in its true native habitat and so if you
I encourage everybody to click here and
you can go directly to abtec Island
through this link and so again this is
just this diorama it's just a portal
into skawanati's much larger worlds I
think it was kind of funny like she she
noted that you can't actually sit on the
benches and I said like well why not
like you're you're already sitting it's
like you you go sit above you go above
it and you you choose to be sitting and
in this way like the rules of new art
City are not hard-coded yeah absolutely
absolutely
um you know before we go into we go into
hisu's room Sammy I want to talk to you
a little bit about your exhibition
design because you were the architect of
this space this Lobby space
um and so you kind of I was really
thinking about dioramas and natural
history museums and corneal histories
and what we could do to push back
against them and you came back with this
unbelievable unbelievable space so tell
us a little bit about what you were
thinking and kind of the design process
there
yeah um I mean I think it because like I
started just painting shapes because it
was kind of hard for me to conceptualize
without seeing what was actually going
to be in the show like how the space
should look and so I made I was
sketching around sort of like
spaces that looked like art galleries
that then like moved or morphed
um and I built a space sort of around
those and as the work started filtering
and the first thing that really inspired
me was looking at dirigibles of Denali
and there was this really cool like
like transparent tent over a whole city
and I made one of those in blender
um and I brought that into the space and
sort of slowly but surely I'm thinking
of and like there were themes that we
saw of like oceans and also like deserts
and so I was trying to like collapse
these Landscapes on one another
um and so I started with a big forest
and with some trees that were moving
around and so and then I we had the
water which really sort of nested
everything and then I realized it was
the forest was really big and it was
really cool to explore it but I think
one of the like the pitfalls with with
the with building a like a Lobby space
is that you can make it really huge and
explorable but then it's challenging to
actually find where all of the artifacts
are located and all the portals are
located even though you can see them in
the blocker so I took care I
miniaturized it so then you could have
the Forest right next to the desert and
put them in these interlocking dioramas
which means that it's relatively looks
relatively expansive and you can't see
everything all at once but you're within
about 15 seconds of all of the portals
that you need to go to if you want to go
into another room and and then out in
the forest we installed all of the works
that live in the lobby space
yeah so just to note that you know not
every artwork you know ports to its own
world we kind of created a sculpture
garden out here where you see work from
Sister lady Bianca Julie Chang and
Tabitha rosaire
um as well that's the second time
tabata's piece has shown that specific
piece has been shown in New York City
well it's an amazing one um and I will
say that you know we were really you
know we had a really ambitious goal for
this show
um and there are going to be a couple
changes coming we have a couple artworks
to insert
um we're still kind of working out a few
rough details some of the artists are
changing so this show May develop and
evolve a little bit over the night over
the coming weeks so we encourage you to
come on back and who knows I'll probably
end up trying to throw some kind of
virtual after party because I love dumb
stuff like that it's so cool that we can
just like keep pushing changes after it
launches yeah yeah we just wanted it to
be like good enough for a month but
we're gonna keep working on it a little
bit and you know adding some some
details
um and you know since we were talking
about you know the Tent City just now
I'm gonna hop into Nathan shaffer's room
to show the original The Originals of
Denali project
um and so you can see the kind of
inspire we just saw the the Tent City
inspiration and so these cities are uh
they are they were originally augmented
reality models that were incorporated
into Nathan's comic book series of the
same title diverticles of Denali and
they're kind of related to the to the
winter moot uh Multiverse so to speak
that are created under Nathan's uh comic
book world that tell the stories of
indigenous superheroes and Indigenous
people as they combat these as they work
with and through kind of cyberpunk
narratives this one particularly being
these models which are uh proposed
models for uh Dome cities in Alaska and
these are all real proposals that were
conceptualized at the time that you know
became Incorporated and that were never
realized and then Nathan incorporated
into the the narratives of the stories
that he was telling with the indigenous
communities in Alaska and so
um you know there's a whole Rich lore
that accompanies all of these works
again they're like you know entire
worlds
um and so I encourage folks to just kind
of like take a peek at this entryway but
really go through the portal go through
the Mist into
um the spaces to the the full worlds
that have been created and here you can
see the Tent City and there's just so
much detail in here
um Nikki salkin it's been so much time
getting these ready because they weren't
in you know web ready format they were
really in augmented reality format and
there's so many tiny little bits and
Bobs and all of these and all of these
environments um and of course we had to
pose them in their native habitat of
Alaska so we kind of looked up some
Mountain models and tried to create the
landscape of you know uh uh of of the
state
um yeah so go and check check this one
out
um
I'm gonna just jump back into the lobby
um we were talking about you know Jesus
work to lay machine the lame assume
digital Shrine so I'm gonna go into her
room next
um and folks who are with me this is a
little bit I mean it's actually not that
heavy I was gonna say this one loads
pretty good
um but yeah here we are
um in uh he sues a 3D scan of Jesus
studio
um in Berkeley
um and we have some like you know little
uh homie bits from her Studio like these
choco these I like to have this like
chalk these choco Champs cereal box and
this fluffy floating cat I mean just
look at the texture on that it's so
beautiful
um you know and we really get this like
really rich fur texture I have no idea
how she was able to squeeze all of these
polygons in here Sammy do you want to
talk a little bit about
um her process because I know that you
were involved in this and this is like
somewhat of a groundbreaking show um if
I understand correctly
um yeah first of our Residency program
for sure I mean like I don't know her
work is definitely groundbreaking in
general this is actually her current
um apartment and that's her partner next
to Lamas Newman her so she's like
sitting at her computer where she's
actually where she actually built this
um and so yeah we love it I mean like
her practice is so like her website lame
assume dot I think it's called
lamelessum.com
um I need to double check that but it's
like it's it's an archival practice in
the first place right she has an archive
of the of the each of the avatars she
made of her female ancestors and she has
an archive of all the spaces that she
she's lived in or that are significant
to lame assume like her Studio at
Berkeley which was used as a shrine
um and so she had the assets already and
it was our job to sort of help her
figure out how to how to make them
publish in a Web Web format so you could
actually walk around them rather than
just like look at them as inner
artifacts so it was really cool because
like this other part of her practice is
so beautifully documented it was great
to sort of help her think through some
other ways that she can sort of bring
these different sort of sites of memory
in the conversation with one another in
a way that was more like slippery
um and I think one of the other really
cool things is like because co-presence
is one of the things that we do it's
also been it's going to continue to be a
site of ritual so it when you go into
lame assume Shrine you can see that they
did a ritual on chuso which is the like
uh I think it's the like fall festival
in Korea and so they they had a potluck
and then they 3D scanned all of the
people who are at the potluck and then
they got it all into new art city so
it's it's a virtual offering and you can
see lame assume which is the the sort of
I wouldn't want to call her a God but
she's she's this sort of like sublimated
form of her like generational identity
next to all of her herself and all of
her female ancestors
um
and I mean
she's she's really really talented with
working with 3D scans because that's
like really Central to her practice and
what we figured out is that the the
image textures that go on these are
usually like really really high
um and once she was able to start
reducing the size of those the work got
a lot easier
um like decimating is something that we
definitely needed to do to some of the
models but and there's also some like I
don't know nerdy stuff like quantizing
that like Benny figured out but really
we just like sat with her every week say
like okay conceptually where are we
where are you at like technically where
are you at and then like our whole team
would like uh would just sort of problem
solve
um so yeah it was like really nice to be
able to give like a lot of attention to
it
yeah
um I I love this face I spent a lot of
time exploring in here
um and it's just I mean it looks it
always makes me hungry when I come in
here because there's so much food on the
table
um I'm not gonna unfortunately I'm not
gonna show the other two spaces because
with the live stream my my bandwidth is
a little bit too low to give you a
career view but please explore through
the show um the two spaces that I didn't
show are surprising exciting
heartwarming scary
um you know all of the above
um so it's a real journey to kind of oh
I'm inside somebody's head
um it's really it's really um oh and I
have to I like honestly have to shout
this out like I don't mean to blow up
gone spot at all but Dawn actually
attended this uh this ritual in person
um and I believe he's in here somewhere
um
where did he go
um oh there he is he's over here
this is uh you know it's so funny it
remind you I was saying earlier we were
going through that it reminds me of like
that PS1 Harry Potter game where they
like have weird face textures oh and
there he is too Don's in here with us uh
virtually and there's his uh his 3D scan
that's so funny
um I love that
um
I'm going to go back to the lobby now
um but please go check out there's two
more spaces that are that we didn't show
so definitely go and explore those and
I'm going to jump into the Next Room
really quickly but
um I think that I have some like
optimize a little bit of optimizing to
do in here because it's gonna run a
little slow and it's definitely gonna
run slow like on the live stream oh it's
not so bad it's not so bad
um this is chiare Rebo and chan chan
needed space
um based on two of their mixed reality
works this one is called OG
um and it tells the story of a
trans-pacific deity that's born from
underwater submarine fiber optic cables
and so this work is actually also posed
in the epoch gallery show replicants
which is currently on view if you go to
epoch.gallery and you can see this where
it kind of pose in a different context
and what's really cool about this work
is that it's posed with its sister
sculpture this one is called nikili and
this godx
um is based on Hawaiian mythology
um Hawaiian reverence for the ocean we
can see the humuh up there at the top
kind of floating it doesn't it's like
right there
um and what's cool about this is that
these sculptures one is in its native
environment in Epoch Gallery this
sculpture is posed against the Hong Kong
Skyline it's kind of a futuristic
cyberpunk Hong Kong where there is a
submarine cable portal that carries data
from Hawaii to Hong Kong but Nick and
and but nikiwi
um is posed here in new art City against
the coastline of Oahu particularly uh
it's posed uh next to in a point which
in Hawaiian Maori uh uh uh you know
storytelling is the portal to souls the
gate to souls I believe and I'm you know
Tiara is going to kill me later I'm
going to see her tonight um for
butchering that but um you know uh it's
it's it's it's a it's a very spiritual
place um for Hawaiian people and so it's
really cool here to see our two shows
connected to each other
um I'm going to take you in a second to
the replicants show we'll show you the
portal on how you can access that show
but with the two shows are linked
together and the two sculptures the two
sister sculptures are posed you know
across the hyperlink and so this is kind
of our little homage to the story that
uh and tiari are telling and ways that
we can think through interconnection you
know in different in different virtual
spaces
um so just jumping back to the lobby
um let's go Sammy let's go and check out
um the epoch gallery show
um and kind of see what's what's going
on over there so Peter Wu plus uh who's
the director and the founder of epoch
Gallery built um this portal
um which kind of is in uh traditional
um style of different public monuments
and in Hong Kong and also in China
um and so if you click on this portal
you'll get taken directly into uh we
need to fix the size I see it's a little
bit small right now we're gonna kind of
you know tidy it up a little bit
um so still remastering
um but if I click in here
um can you still see oh yeah it's
loading I can see my screen that's great
um you can enter the replicant show
um and I'm not going to tour through
like too too much because
um you know I don't want to put too many
words in Peter's mouth or in the mouth
of the artist who created the show as
you know this is um you know put
together by a lot of people
um but you can see we're in this you
know kind of cyberpunk Blade Runner
inspired Hong Kong and there in the
distance you can see OG posed um kind of
in her own uh her own native environment
and you can see again like the city
skyline behind and again how these two
sculptures are interconnected across
different digital spaces
um we also have work in this show in the
replica show from another artist who's
also in the gray area exhibition and
that's work by caking and so if I click
all the way through and move through the
cityscape to the end
um I arrive at their sculpture
um which uh Peter created a custom kind
of uh City like a special cityscape and
like lighting design around
um to pose
um we also see work by Jennifer West
here in the back which is really
beautiful
um and uh yeah I won't say too much more
about that go and explore the show
yourself everything has links here
there's tons of more information about
each of the pieces there are there's
audio work and a soundtrack it's just so
uh rich and well developed so please
please check out the I guess Tyrone was
kind of like 10 shows in one in not
um you know but but moving back to you
know the lobby space
um we're right next to Sammy's own
installation because when we first
conceptualized this show and I asked
Sammy to come and architect it you know
I wanted I haven't been seeing the
amazing work that Sammy's been doing
over the past year at uh at uh new art
city and on top of you know guiding a
whole community of artists and helping
to you know keep the platform afloat
um she's also
um been making her own artwork and
making her own spaces here which are
incredible so I also asked her if she'd
be willing to contribute one of her own
artworks uh to the show as well and we
can see the portal here we've got this
like absolutely fabulous abstract moving
geometric diorama here oh I jumped right
in the portal so we'll just uh we'll
just go right in
um
and this this is the projected Observer
is the name of this work
um and there's a lot of really
interesting aspects to to this space one
being that well first of all the entire
show is uh has all text we've made all
text for all of the rooms um and all of
the sculptures in the lobby we're still
working on getting all text up for every
individual object that's uploaded
there's hundreds and hundreds of them so
you know if anybody's using a screen
reader out there or is in any way
visually impaired
um we're we're not where we're about 70
of the way there but we're not totally
there and this experience will be fully
accessible to you
um very very soon
um Timmy are you still here
oh maybe Sammy's gone uh that's okay
um I muted I was just eating beef jerky
oh no it's all good I was like about to
start talking about this but I would I'd
rather hear it from you oh goodness
artists should never talk about their
art
um always be forced to talk about it
because by asking artists uncomfortable
questions about their work so much cool
stuff comes out of it so we'll see what
we can decide today yeah
um yeah this is it's like the it's the
longest I've ever taken to make a work
of art this has been it's sort of
uh collapses my entire blender Journey
so if you look down at the floor for
example like this texture is whacked
it's all messed up
because I was I didn't know what I was
doing I just like I had a tree and I
wanted to make a floor I had this this
you know weird jumbled mass of vertices
around the tree
um
I think I made the jumbled massive
vertices first and I stuck at creating
it so I'm just I'm just trying to make a
gallery that doesn't look [__] and over
time I'm like huh maybe I should put
some art in here
and so the the toilet came first
um
and you can see in the description Donna
he was like okay the obligatory like new
artsy scary toilet
um and then I made these little
galleries that were I don't know I was a
little more comfortable with them they
had or like I was playing with
transparency and glass
um and so inside of the gallery is of
course a miniature of the gallery and
inside of those Miniatures are yet more
Miniatures so like I of course it was a
pleasure to do a show about recursion
because like that's that's the thing
that like Delights me most foreign
[Music]
this diorama is you know actually
actualized in in the show
um oh my gosh it's like you got diorama
inside of diorama and here's another
diorama of the show that's inside of a
diorama
um So So Meta
um and so that little that little orb is
actually also the sky and so one of the
things that I I I enjoyed was like when
you go into the opaque Gallery it's like
you sort of realize that walls in
Virtual space are more meant to like
occlude things than like hold them up
and so it's sort of there are Works
inside but in order to see them you have
to you have to go inside of the thing
you have slits so you can see outside
but this orb in the center will begin to
intersect the space and so it's sort of
intruding on itself and it kind of
reminds like when you go into the other
room there are these these sort of
slices of polygon that that go that just
go through the
the space
um and then tint the images that are
behind it but the images weren't there
before those came later and then when
you go out and look out the window you
can you can have your viewport this be
totally taken over by this this evolving
shape and each time you see it it will
be unique it's a generative artwork in
itself
um oh my gosh I love the teeny tiny
toilet I'm sorry
it's so cute I've got a miniaturized
Flags too
um but there are this is also sort of a
game there are environmental puzzles
that you can get you all like to
different places and you have to like in
order to discover the videos that these
these were
um shot like Snapped from you have to go
through the tunnel and if you want to
see you know some of it's like there are
four different like visual works that
I'm I like installed sort of over the
six months that I was working on and
these are these like moments of
reflection my transition I encourage you
to read the exhibition statement I'm
like I don't know it's not that
prominently featured but it explains my
thoughts maybe more concisely
um beautiful text Sammy um and while
you're while you're talking about the
text I'd love to hear
um you know I know that you have
you have very very intentionally made
this space something that is accessible
to people of all Visual and hearing
abilities
um and I want to talk to you a little
bit about how you design that and how
you you know approach this idea of
creating accessible online exhibitions
for everyone yeah I mean it's like it's
really a process and it's like I I can
really see like how far it needs to come
to be accessible in a way that I think
is like as good as it should be and like
I'm really really interested in making
ways to make this to impart flavor both
in the 3D and 2D environments and we're
like not quite there yet we like the
screen reader accessibility feature we
have is like a bare bare minimum that
like we generate an exhibition catalog
which we should be generating anyway
that can be read by screen readers but
it like from a user perspective it's I
give it like a D minus I just it's like
it has so much work that needs to happen
um
and so like we have a commitment to it
but like I think it's really important
to state that we're like not there
um so one of the ways I try to solve for
for specifically Vision impairment in
this space is to make it so each of your
number Keys take you to the to each of
the piece like the things that I would
consider a piece that are installed in
the gallery and in each of those places
there are also collages of sound in
Stereo that that are basically doing the
same thing the visual pieces are doing
they're like collapsing time they're
pulling things out of my archive and
they're also my current way of
processing my identity right and so you
can you move slowly between the
different places so you can hear the
sound change and one of the things that
needs to be added here is that each of
those waypoints I'm going to add a
voiceover which doesn't necessarily do
the patronizing like try to describe
every single thing you see in the frame
and instead sort of offer like some
moments of sincere reflection with this
space which is like something that I
think is equally desirable for cited and
non-sighted people and I think this is
really like philosophically the way that
we want to approach accessibility in
Newark city not as an afterthought but
as a core feature
absolutely it has to be
um and you know I've learned you know
just in creating the show I learned so
much from you about how to create alt
text and you know what it means and I I
had so much you know I I've always
struggled with that because I'm an
extremely visual person and you know
that's kind of I'm a very visual person
I'm also sight impaired um and but I you
know
it's it's it's it's some and it was such
a valuable exercise to have to describe
what something is in order to give
somebody a window into it without
showing them a picture
um the alt text that was kind of my
Approach that like these are because it
was especially interesting for the
images where like it's pretty abstract
but like the the Salient feature of the
image is that is like the eye my eye see
like looking at myself into the camera
through the Distortion right like the
the meaning exists in a third space
outside the artifact itself and so I try
to sort of make it this evolving poem
where I am and describing the elements
but like listening to it uh lets you see
the story and if you're if you're
sighted you have to figure out how to
use a screen reader and you have to see
how much it sucks to use one
yeah absolutely
um and you know also you know engage
other senses to fully comprehend what
this space is all about yeah and then I
say it sucks it's like morality renders
in time right so like you there's no
option like
text renders visually for us right so
you can you you see it as an image but
when you listen to it it's it's it's
necessarily durational so it's like
inviting you to sit with the place in
the same way that the exhibition tries
to
absolutely oh this is so beautiful I you
know I want to just hang out under the
Banyan tree for forever
um but there's so many fun little
surprises and secrets and little things
that are random you know this is a
generative piece the shapes and the
shaders and the different refractions
are constantly shifting and so everybody
gets a slightly different experience and
there's really so many moments for
Serendipity that you know make
themselves uh that you know kind of
present themselves to you as this as
this show unfolds
um really really honored to show this
work Sammy it's so so fun thank you for
letting me talk and I mean more than
that too I mean I love your distilled
image works that you have in there
um as well because that's a part of your
you know I'm so familiar with your 3D
work I'm not as familiar with your
photographic or your still image or even
your moving image works so that was like
a really nice um you know entry point
into
um some of the other things that you're
thinking out Beyond just designing
spaces
um you know in this show
um since we're right here I want to
judge the next term I want to jump into
is caken's room
um and this room is called wisdoms for
love 3.0 based on the video game of the
same title created by Kraken
um and this we basically tried to
recreate a scene
um from their film metaverse we are at
the end of something
um and this scene also replicates itself
in the work wisdoms for love 3.0
essentially what to describe before I
get into too much of the plot
um which I think you kind of just have
to like watch an experience for yourself
I don't want to say too much but you
know this war the the word the game work
wisdoms for love 3.0 which you can
access
um through clicking the video you'll be
you'll be taken to the game
um and you can play through it you know
again this is just a portal into a
larger world we wanted to recreate a set
from the game to give it again a diorama
of the larger world and in the video
behind you can see some moments from
this world as captured you know in the
film piece that accompanies it
um and this is there's so much lore
that's involved in this show I mean in
each this this character that you see
before you is the Divine mother and what
she's giving birth to in her transparent
womb is difficult conversations
um she's holding a teardrop that says
truth
um and each of these knives that are a
key part of the lore that come from this
world of business for love 3.0 um are
here kind of floating and and slowly uh
rotating over over this Endless Ocean
that that we've presented
um
to say a little bit about the plot
wisdoms for lead 3.0 is a video game
work that imagines a world where
specifically related to cryptocurrency a
world where we're trading for in a web
3.0 future a world where we're trading
in love and in wisdom rather than in
financial uh instruments and where the
value comes from exchanging wisdom and
building connection
um and it's kind of their somewhat
utopian dystopian you know vision for
the future and and what that might look
like
um
beyond that I think um accompanying this
work there are over 80 individual tokens
that will be released by a transfer
Gallery
um there is a film piece there is
another film piece from which the
smaller film piece is derived from
there's as you know obviously a video
game there is so many Rich access points
into this work one that's really what
kicking is all about is they create
worlds and so their work is kind of
squidgy and doesn't necessarily fit into
the nice neat categories that other
kinds of artwork do but that's because
what they're doing is building worlds
and the products from those worlds are
what you see here as videos as 3D
sculptures as immersive environments and
as games
um
there's just a couple you know speaking
of games
um the next uh the the next space that I
want to show is Jeremy quiard
um who is a game designer
um and he basically most of his games
are available on itch.io so you can
search in Jeremy creart on itch and I
hope one of my colleagues will drop this
in the chat
um and he basically came and he brought
a bunch of different elements from many
different game works of his to create
these mini dioramas of those games but
also to create a new narrative entirely
it's its own um so we see some different
elements like this little deer guy
um a guy being gender neutral of course
um we've got this uh little hang from
the tree creature
um but throughout you know there's
different things that you know there's
different pieces of text which no one
can't find it I know there's like a
piece of text somewhere around here
um that kind of tell a narrative and
kind of Point into the absurdist world
that uh you know Jeremy's creating
um
you know here we have some of the text
for example and we have a little you
know character that's kind of rat this
rat or Mouse uh Mouse person uh you know
sitting on the stairs also I should
mention the interest boost throughout
the piece are these small video works um
or I guess there might even be gifts um
but these moving image pieces show the
development of Long Island City New York
over time
um and so these are different
screenshots from Google Earth and or
Google Map street view showing how Long
Island City in New York has changed
um this is where Jeremy works and you
know he's seen over the years how it has
totally transformed and kind of how
absurd and isolating the the new the new
construction has been and so you know
you know his work really explores the
Absurd the the crazy the the
ugly the scary all of it kind of coming
together and how you know painful and
ridiculous but also beautiful life is
you know I think that this like
Whimsical kind of um
uh Rube Goldberg sort of contraption
here
um kind of points that out it's like
it's complicated but silly
um and a little bit nonsensical and then
I think that's you know kind of an ethos
that carries through Jeremy's work in
which he speaks to
um how he approaches creating worlds you
know by pointing out these moments of
absurdity or creating satire
um you know there's really core points
of reflection that can be made and then
again within that we've got these like
really nice little scenes and this is my
favorite part of the whole show this is
my favorite part of the whole piece
um in this bedroom we've got the deer on
the bed we have the hanging character
from the ceiling and of course this
iconic iconic quote can you imagine Karl
Marx taking a [__] and looking at Reddit
on his phone and I think that this just
perfectly encapsulates that feeling of
absurdity that is confronting Us in life
and we were talking a little bit earlier
about how this moment in time is where
you know still in the throes of pandemic
as uh it's the the globally it's
politically very unstable we're having
all of these you know wild problems and
the world just seems a bit absurd
um and you know I think that this just
speaks so presciently to what we're
going through the fact that you know
like if any of these great thinkers were
alive today they would probably that we
you know kind of uphold and lot and you
know think through that they would be
doing the same dumb stuff as us like
taking a [__] and looking at Reddit you
know on their on their phones
um
my other this is a really fun room
because there's so many little surprises
and secrets and Easter eggs
um hidden throughout this is a really
lovely scene
um uh if you're on the stage
um and uh over up above here you know
there's so many different little pieces
to this you can see it's quite expansive
um and here we've got my favorite
remember one of my other favorite parts
of this room
um this kind of like dinosaur cow
creature in this little house sticking
its head out the window and if you zoom
in and go into his butthole we've got
this little character with a with a
sweater on that just says I'm gonna try
to get closer it's kind of hard
um this little spreader sweater that
just says depression on it
um and I think you know little dude in a
depression sweatshirt sitting in a cow's
butthole like there's something about
that that I can't describe but that
feels so visceral
um you kind of you totally get the
feeling that
um he's trying to to engender in in the
audience
um
finally at the top of the at the top of
this uh staircase we have a witch in a
pool uh floating on a floaty but the
pool is another one of Jeremy's uh
studies of the transformation of Long
Island City uh in New York
um but his games this is just kind of a
you know again a diorama of something
much larger you can go to itch.io and
search Jeremy quiard to find all of his
game works that are available they're
super inexpensive they're extremely
engaging they're beautiful they're
narrative and each of them kind of
creates its own you know Universe
um in doing so
um uh over here uh second to last we
have
um a room by Oreo Harvey and Rodell
Warner
um and there are pieces called
stellarium
um and they actually coll as I was
talking about a little bit earlier they
actually collaborated in building the
space so they um originally were had
their own ideas about what they wanted
to show
um and they came into this space
together and they started collaborating
and they this is what kind of came out
with it they totally changed their plan
and they co-constructed this kind of uh
infant that's contained yet infinite
stellarium where we have some of the the
rotating plant sculptures by Roberto
Warner which has become extremely
emblematic of his practice lately as
well as these lovely starch these lovely
star children
um that create kind of the background
um and Oreo also created this um the the
container this this this crystalline
structure which hosts which hosts all of
the pieces
um and it just it's hypnotic and you
float through and it's the space for
contemplation and for rest there's
constant motion but it's not sickening
um or uh distracting it's it's quite
meditative so I this is another space
that I invite folks to come
um and experience you know both Oria and
Rodell are thinking about uh hyper
materiality about about
um creating objects that serve as
expanded internet art that exists as
multiple material forms at once that
span different media environments that
span different physical environments
um and this is just such a nice way of
looking into both of the things that
that they're thinking about
um finally we have one last room in the
show before we break and start our after
party in the video lounges
um I want to show this piece over here
by
um
McMillan and Joey holder
and this is a work that Dawn worked
really hard on basically Joey's film
Abyssal Seeker exists as a blender file
and so we decided okay this is meant to
be witnessed as a two-dimensional thing
but what if we blew up all the elements
and expanded them into 3D and so we took
the underwater cave that the film piece
uh creates and we turned it 3D we made
it physical and made it possible for
people to move around it so if you watch
Joey's piece of Bissell Seeker which is
linked if you click on any of these uh
kind of creature sculptures you can go
and you can watch the piece and kind of
see what it is and then you know from in
here you can you know kind of experience
it from the inside
um and it was a really amazing
um you know
and this is kind of expanding off of
Joey's practice of
um you know Fringe biology and Research
into the biological sciences and
different kinds of creatures and looking
through scientific research as a means
of art production
um you know she's thinking about
creatures that live on the bottom of the
ocean we've got this kind of like uh
huge mouth like snake creature floating
paths if you can see that I know it's a
little bit dark it'll come it'll come
through again he floats around
um and and yeah we wanted to make that
something that was immersive and it also
um because Joey's work is extremely
immersive she does these unbelievable
installations in different places around
the world that incorporate sculpture and
video and and image and all these
different things
um
and lucky as we even have it Roger named
McMillan who we're seeing on screen
before us from her uh black uh her
movement portrait series
um
she often when she does virtual
installations most notably at synthesis
Gallery recently often poses her work in
underwater caves or in these kind of
cave environments with water on the
floor and so we were like this is
amazing because Joey's work is basically
the perfect stage for this work this is
where it is meant to be witnessed and so
it was just a really nice bit of
symmetry there
um and uh you know this piece is coming
again from logina's movement portrait
project where she worked with dancers to
3D scan them and their movement in order
to Archive preserve and care for black
movement as a digital artifact this is
something that is often not preserved a
black movement is something that's
appropriated and and misconstrued and so
this project uh really resists that and
also manifests as these unbelievable uh
Unreal Engine rendered uh movement
studies which you can see which you can
see in here
um that's that's most of the show
um I don't want to say too much more I
want audience members to go in kind of
experience it for yourself but if you
have any questions feel free to you know
uh let us know we'd love to chat to you
about them
um you know over here in the kind of
sculpture garden area we have
um a 3D scanned Sugar Mill from Valencia
game to perform this week uh we have a
sculpture from Sister lady Bianca who
spoke earlier today
um there are some elements from
huntress's performance which is going to
be happening this Tuesday we have
imposed the final sculpture here yet
because the performance hasn't happened
um and we also have this uh work which
is called ultramet recapitulation by by
Tabitha rizzere these works all have
very rich narratives and rather than
tell you about them I invite you to come
and learn about the stories
um yourself
um and I think that's about a wrap um I
think I went a bit over time and wanted
to show off the show um